# OLP-GNN

This repository contains the code of our paper "Learning Optimal Linear Precoding for Cell-Free Massive MIMO with GNN", in *Joint European Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases* (ECML PKDD), 2024. The datasets are available at this address: **TODO**.

© 2024 Nokia\
Licensed under the BSD 3-Clause Clear License\
SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-3-Clause-Clear

## Dependencies

This program is implemented in Python 3.10 with PyTorch 2.0.0, Pytorch Geometric 2.3.0 and
PyTorch Lightning 2.0.2. The full list of packages can be found in `requirements.txt`. Run `pip install -r requirements.txt` to install them.

PyPAPI (python_papi) is an optional package only required to count the number of FLOPs of the MR, ZF, OLP precoders in `data_generation` and OLP-GNN in `plot_flops.py`. It is included in `requirements.txt`.

In addition to these dependencies, the scripts in `data_generation` require to install MOSEK as the SOCP solver called by `cvxpy`. The instructions to install MOSEK can be found on their website: https://docs.mosek.com/latest/install/installation.html.

## Quickstart

Here are quick instructions to reproduce the numerical results presented in our paper.
1. First download the raw datasets from **TODO** and place them in a separate folder, e.g., named `data`.
2. Run the following script to preprocess and split the data into training, validation and test datasets, which are saved in a single file `dataset_train.pt` for later use:

    ```python data_preprocessing.py data```

The model proposed in the paper is saved as a Pytorch Lightning checkpoint file in `trained_model/checkpoints/best_epoch=953.ckpt`. The following scripts evaluate this model on the test data in terms of spectral efficiency, number of FLOPs and runtime. In the next steps 3-5, we save all numerical results and figures in a folder `figures`.

3. The spectral efficiency CDFs for all test datasets are obtained by:

    ```python plot_cdf.py trained_model/checkpoints/best_epoch=953.ckpt data figures```

4. The FLOPs are counted by the following script. Running this script requires python_papi installed and a CPU compatible with `PAPI_SP_OPS` event.

    ```python plot_flops.py trained_model/checkpoints/best_epoch=953.ckpt data figures```

5. The runtimes are measured in:

    ```python test_compiled_runtimes.py trained_model/checkpoints/best_epoch=953.ckpt figures```

## Repository Overview

### Data Generation
Folder `data_generation` contains the code to simulate various LoS and NLoS channel coefficients and generate MR, ZF and OLP precoding matrices. The data used in the paper is available in **TODO**. Additional data could be produced with the following calls:

LoS data can be generated by running: `python data_generation_los.py <N> <M> <K> <f> <precoder>`.

NLoS data can be generated by running: `python data_generation.py <N> <M> <K> <mor> <precoder>`.

`N` is the number of graphs to generate, `M` the number of APs, `K` the number of UEs. The `precoder` is either `olp`, `mr` or `zf`. In the LoS case, `f` is the carrier frequency in GHz.  In the NLoS case, `mor` is the the radio propagation morphology which can be either `urban`, `suburban` or `rural`. `precoder` is either `olp`, `mr` or `zf`.

### Graph Neural Network
There are 3 GNN implementations in this repository: `GNNLinearPrecodingPyG` is a Lightning Module implemented with Pytorch Geometric functions. `FastGNNLinearPrecoding` is a pure Pytorch module (does not use Lightning or PyG), it can be compiled and has the fastest inference runtime among all. `FastGNNLinearPrecodingLightning` is a Lightning model that encapsulates `FastGNNLinearPrecoding` for simpler developpement routines (training, validation and testing with logs and checkpoints).

`FastGNNLinearPrecoding` and `GNNLinearPrecodingPyG` are similar but their outputs may differ due to different implementations of the basic operations (PyTorch vs. PyTorch Geometric).

### Training Pipeline

Before training the model, one must first preprocess the raw data files generated in the `data_generation` folder. The script `data_preprocessing.py` preprocesses and splits the data into training, validation and test datasets. Any new raw data file must be added to this script with its split `(train_split, validation_split, test_split)` specified.

```python data_preprocessing.py <raw_data_folder>```

Then, to train an OLP-GNN model: 

```python gnn_train.py```

Finally, the obtained model checkpoint (.ckpt) can be evaluated following the instructions in the above quickstart section.
